---
title: 'Berkovich Line, part 1'
date: 2022-05-28
permalink: /posts/2022/05/berkovich-line-1/
author_profile: false
tags:
  - English
  - Berkovich Analytification
  - Tropical Geometry
  - Non-archimedean Field
---

This series of posts is aimed to be a rudiment of the Berkovich line, a locally compact space that "fills up" a non-archimedean field $K$. The materials here are more or less my summary of the lecture note by [(M. Baker 2007)](https://swc-math.github.io/aws/2007/BakerNotesMarch21.pdf), with some extra materials that I found meaningful to append.

# Non-archimedean Fields

A _non-archimedean field_ $(K,\vert\cdot\vert)$ is a field $K$ with an absolute value $\vert\cdot\vert$, that satisfies the followings.

 1. $\vert a\vert=0$ if and only if $a=0$.
 1. $\vert ab\vert=\vert a\vert\cdot\vert b\vert$, 
 1. $\vert a+b\vert\leq\max\left(\vert a\vert,\vert b\vert\right)$,
 1. ...with equality if $\vert a\vert\neq\vert b\vert$.<sup><a href="#fn1" id="ref1">1</a></sup>

The first one is simply the nondegeneracy of the absolute value, and the second is quite natural among absolute values on fields (unlike algebras, where we demand submultiplicative $\vert ab\vert\leq\vert a\vert\cdot\vert b\vert$).

The third is the oddest line. It resembles the triangle inequality $\vert a+b\vert\leq\vert a\vert+\vert b\vert$, but the right-hand side is replaced with the maximum of two norms, instead of their sum.

The fourth line is the equality condition: if one quantity is strictly smaller than the other, then we have equality. Compare this with the equality condition of the triangle inequality: when "two quantities have equal sign/direction."

An equivalent way of saying this is to declare a _valuation_ of the field $K$. For that, choose a number $q>1$, and set $v(a):=-\log_q\vert a\vert$ (note the _negated_ logarithm). This declares a function $v\colon K\to\mathbb{R}\cup\{\infty\}$ such that

 1. $v(a)=\infty$ if and only if $a=0$.
 1. $v(ab)=v(a)+v(b)$.
 1. $v(a+b)\geq\min\left(v(a),v(b)\right)$,
 1. ...with equality if $v(a)\neq v(b)$.

I will later be interested in a non-archimedean field $K$ which is _algebraically closed_ and _Cauchy complete_. But before I continue, let me list some first examples of the notion.

## Example 1: formal Laurant series, Puiseux Series

The field $k((t))$ of [formal Laurent series](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formal_power_series#Formal_Laurent_series) on any (algebraically closed) field $k$ is one of the first examples of a non-archimedean field. It is defined by the valuation (assume $a_{-N}\neq 0$)

$$v(a_{-N}t^{-N}+a_{-N+1}t^{-N+1}+\ldots) = -N,$$

so we have $v(1)=v(t^0)=0$, $v(t^2+t^3+t^5+\ldots)=2$, $v(\exp(t)-1)=1$, etc. Function $v$ measures the order of zero $t=0$, while a pole is interpreted as a negative zero.

The first two axioms of valuations are thus quite natural if we recall how to do multiplication of (formal) Laurent series. The third axiom is meant to cover the following case: if

$$a=\sum_{i=v}^\infty a_it^i,\quad b=\sum_{i=v}^\infty b_it^i,$$

are two Laurent series with same valuation $v(a)=v(b)=v$, their sum

$$a+b=\sum_{i=v}^\infty(a_i+b_i)t^i$$

will have (1) valuation $v$ if $a_v+b_v\neq 0$, but (2) valuation $>v$ if $a_v+b_v=0$ and one needs to go up the exponents to find a nonzero term. This is how we understand $v(a+b)\geq\min(v(a),v(b))$.

On the other hand, if $v(a)=v<v(b)=v+w$ say, then writing

$$a=\sum_{i=v}^\infty a_it^i,\quad b=\sum_{j=v+w}^\infty b_jt^j,$$

we have

$$a+b=a_vt^v+a_{v+1}t^{v+1}+\ldots+a_{v+w-1}t^{v+w-1}+(a_{v+w}+b_{v+w})t^{v+w}+\cdots,$$

so by $a_v\neq 0$, $v(a+b)=v=v(a)=\min(v(a),v(b))$ follows.

The algebraic closure of the field of formal Laurent series is the field of [Puiseux series](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Puiseux_series#Newton–Puiseux_theorem),

$$k\{\{t\}\}:=\bigcup_{i=1}^\infty k((t^{1/i})).$$

where the valuation on $k((t))$ extends to Puiseux series naturally, so that $v(t^{1/i})=\frac1i$.

Note that this field is **not** (Cauchy) complete. To verify so, think of the series

$$\sum_{n=1}^\infty t^{n^{2n}/n!}= t+t^8+t^{121\frac12}+t^{2730\frac23}+\cdots.$$

This series does not fit into $k((t^{1/i}))$ for any $i$, but the partial sums are Cauchy (as the exponents increase to infinity). Because of that, one needs to Cauchy complete the Puiseux field $$k\{\{t\}\}$$ if one requires a non-archimedean algebraically-closed Cauchy-complete field.

## Example 2: p-adic fields

Any introduction of [$p$-adic fields](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P-adic_number) $$\mathbb{Q}_p$$ involves some notes that goes as follows. On the rational field $\mathbb{Q}$, one may make a metric completion not just with the standard absolute value (and get $\mathbb{R}$), but also with _$p$-adic absolute values_ $\vert\cdot\vert_p$. This absolute value is defined with the _$p$-adic valuation_ $v_p$<sup><a href="#fn2" id="ref2">2</a></sup> that satisfies the following axioms.

 1. $v_p(a)<\infty$ if $a\neq 0$, and $v_p(0)=\infty$.
 2. $v_p(ab)=v_p(a)+v_p(b)$.
 3. $v_p(a+b)\geq\min\left(v_p(a),v_p(b)\right)$.
 4. $v_p(a+b)=\min\left(v_p(a),v_p(b)\right)$ holds if $v_p(a)>v_p(b)$ holds.

Adding $v_p(p)=1$ and $v_p(a)=0$ if $(a,p)=1$, the axioms completely determines $v_p$. Morally, if $a\in\mathbb{Z}$, the valuation $v_p(a)$ find the number $v$ in which $p^v \vert\vert a$ (i.e., $p^v\mid a$ but $p^{v+1}\nmid a$) holds.

The corresponding $p$-adic absolute value is declared as follows:

$$\vert a\vert_p:=p^{-v_p(a)}.$$

By this, we Cauchy complete the metric space $(\mathbb{Q},\vert\cdot\vert_p)$ to obtain the _$p$-adic field_ $\mathbb{Q}_p$.

This field is not algebraically closed, and we denote the algebraic closure as $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}_p$. Still the metric $\vert\cdot\vert_p$ extends to there; say by $\vert p^{1/4}\vert_p=p^{-1/4}$, etc. However, one can also find a series in $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}_p$ that is Cauchy but not convergent in $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}_p$ (see [(Koblitz 1996)](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-1112-9), Sec. III.4, Theorem 12). Hence one Cauchy-completes the metric spcae $(\overline{\mathbb{Q}}_p,\vert\cdot\vert_p)$, and obtain a non-archimedean, algebraically-closed, Cauchy-complete field $(\mathbb{C}_p,\vert\cdot\vert_p)$.

<sup id="fn1">1. This axiom is in fact redundant, by the following argument (proof from [Junekey Jeon](https://jk-jeon.github.io/)). Suppose $\vert a\vert<\vert b\vert$. Then if $\vert a+b\vert\neq\vert b\vert$, we have $\vert a+b\vert<\vert b\vert$. But then as $\vert b\vert=\max(\vert b\vert,\vert-a\vert)\leq\max(\vert a+b\vert,\vert -a\vert)$, this contradicts unless $\max(\vert b\vert,\vert -a\vert)=\vert-a\vert$, which is another contradiction to $\vert a\vert<\vert b\vert$.<a href="#ref1" title="Jump back to footnote 1 in the text.">↩</a></sup><br>
<sup id="fn2">2. I believe that $\nu_p$ (nu, not vee) is more common notation for this. Nonetheless, I also believe that the 'vee' notation is making more sense, as this is compatible with the word '**V**aluations.'<a href="#ref2" title="Jump back to footnote 2 in the text.">↩</a></sup>

# Gelfand theory?

An algebraically-closed Cauchy-complete normed field that we first see, is the field of complex numbers $\mathbb{C}$. This field is perfect to build a theory of Banach algebras (algebra with a complete, submultiplicative norm) over $\mathbb{C}$. (See [Gelfand duality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gelfand_representation) and [Gelfand--Mazur Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gelfand%E2%80%93Mazur_theorem).)

Now as another algebraically-closed Cauchy-complete field $K$, but non-archimedean, we would expect something similar. That is, for a commutative Banach algebra $A$ over $K$, we expect that the space of $K$-algebra maps $A\to K$ forms the 'spectrum' of $A$ and continuous maps on the 'spectrum' of $A$ recovers $A$.

No, not the case for non-archimedean $K$. This is because there is a field extension $L/K$ (yes, must be transcendental) and an extension norm $\vert\cdot\vert_L$ of $(K,\vert\cdot\vert)$. This makes $L$ a normed $K$-algebra, but the 'spectrum' of $L$ is empty (there is no $K$-algebra map $L\to K$), so the "usual" Gelfand duality is not the case here.

 > <b id="gauss">Example.</b> Let $L$ be the field of rational functions $K(T)$ in 1 variable. Since any $f\in K(T)$ may be written
 >
 > $$f(T) = a\cdot\frac{(T-x_1)(T-x_2)\ldots(T-x_n)}{(T-y_1)(T-y_2)\ldots(T-y_m)},$$
 >
 > if we declare
 >
 > $$\vert f(T)\vert_L = \vert a\vert\cdot\frac{\max(1,\vert x_1\vert)\cdot \max(1,\vert x_2\vert)\cdots\max(1,\vert x_n\vert)}{\max(1,\vert y_1\vert)\cdot\max(1,\vert y_2\vert)\cdots\max(1,\vert y_m\vert)},$$
 >
 > this norm $\vert\cdot\vert_L$ declares a multiplicative _nondegenerate_ norm on the field $L$, that extends the norm $\vert\cdot\vert$ on $K$. (Here, that $\vert f+g\vert_L\leq\vert f\vert_L+\vert g\vert_L$ is left as a nontrivial task for later.)

(One cannot make such a field extension $L/\mathbb{C}$, that extends the modulus on $\mathbb{C}$. This is what Gelfand--Mazur theorem asserts.)

Thus instead, we demand a novel concept for the 'spectrum' of a normed $K$-algebra. Following [Berkovich](https://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~vova/First-steps_2007.pdf), one defines the notion of the _Berkovich spectrum_ as below. (See [(Baker--Rumely 2010)](https://bookstore.ams.org/surv-159) or [(Berkovich 1990)](https://doi.org/10.1090/surv/033).)

# Berkovich Spectrum

From now on, we will deal with a variety of norms defined on an algebra. Thus I will denote $(K,\vert\cdot\vert_K)$ ($K$ emphasized in the subscript) for my non-archimedean field of interest.

Let $A$ be a normed $K$-algebra. A _multiplicative seminorm_ on $A$ is a map $\vert\cdot\vert\colon A\to[0,\infty)$ that has the following properties.

 1. $\vert 0\vert = 0$.
 1. $\vert f\cdot g\vert = \vert f\vert\cdot\vert g\vert$, for $f,g\in A$.
 1. $\vert f+g\vert\leq\vert f\vert + \vert g\vert$.<sup><a href="#fn3" id="ref3">3</a></sup>
 1. $\vert a\vert = \vert a\vert_K$ if $a\in K$.

(Note that the first property does _not_ assert that $\vert f\vert = 0$ only if $f=0$. This is why the term is called *semi*norm, not a norm.)

The _Berkovich spectrum_ of $A$, denoted $\widehat{A}$, is the set of all multiplicative seminorms of $A$. Here, we denote $x\in\widehat{A}$ for points of $\widehat{A}$, while actually it is a seminorm $\vert\cdot\vert_x$ on $A$.

The spectrum $\widehat{A}$ is a topological space endowed with the following subbasic open sets.

$$U(f,(\alpha,\beta)) := \{\vert\cdot\vert_x\in\widehat{A} : \alpha<\vert f\vert_x<\beta\}.$$

 > <b id="evaluation-embedding">Remark.</b> By the evaluation map
 >
 > $$\widehat{A}\hookrightarrow\prod_{f\in A}[0,\infty)\cong\prod_{f\in A}(-\infty,\infty], \\ x\mapsto\left(\vert f\vert_x\right)_{f\in A}\mapsto (-\log_q\vert f\vert_x)_{f\in A},$$
 >
 > we can (topologically) embed $\widehat{A}$ into a product of $(-\infty,\infty]=\mathbb{R}\cup\{\infty\}$'s. This is how the subbasic open sets described above are designed.

<sup id="fn3">3. In fact, one can show that $\vert f+g\vert\leq\max(\vert f\vert,\vert g\vert)$ if the base field $K$ is non-archimedean.<a href="#ref3" title="Jump back to footnote 3 in the text.">↩</a></sup>

# Examples

In my experience, the notion of multiplicative seminorms was new when I happened to learn Berkovich spectra. There were a couple of examples that remedied this unfamiliarity.

 * Some preliminary theory

The following proposition is found to be useful in understanding seminorms.

 > **Proposition.** For a multiplicative seminorm $\vert\cdot\vert$ on $A$, define
 >
 > $$\mathrm{ker}(\vert\cdot\vert) = \{f\in A : \vert f\vert=0\}.$$
 >
 > Then $\mathrm{ker}(\vert\cdot\vert)$ is a prime ideal of $A$.

(Proof) Let $I=\mathrm{ker}(\vert\cdot\vert)$. Then the followings verify that $I$ is a prime ideal.

 * If $f,g\in I$, we have $\vert f+g\vert\leq\vert f\vert+\vert g\vert=0$, so $f+g\in I$ follows.
 * If $f\in I$ and $g\in A$, then $\vert fg\vert=\vert f\vert\cdot\vert g\vert = 0\cdot\vert g\vert = 0$, so $fg\in I$ follows.
 * If $fg\in I$, then $\vert f\cdot g\vert=\vert f\vert\cdot\vert g\vert=0$, so either $\vert f\vert=0$ or $\vert g\vert=0$; hence $f\in I$ or $g\in I$.

So for any multiplicative seminorm $\vert\cdot\vert$, there is a prime ideal $I$ that factors the norm as $\vert\cdot\vert\colon A\to A/I\to[0,\infty)$. Because $A/I$ is an integral domain and $\vert\cdot\vert$ is a multiplicative norm on it, the norm extends to the field of fractions $\mathsf{Frac}(A/I)\to[0,\infty)$. This gives the following

 > **Corollary.** For a multiplicative seminorm $\vert\cdot\vert_x$ on $A$, it has a _residue field_ $\mathcal{H}(x)=\mathsf{Frac}(A/\mathrm{ker}(\vert\cdot\vert_x))$ in which
 > 1. the seminorm $\vert\cdot\vert_x$ factors $A\to\mathcal{H}(x)\to[0,\infty)$,
 > 1. and the induced map $\mathcal{H}(x)\to[0,\infty)$ is a multiplicative **norm** on $\mathcal{H}(x)$.

## Examples over $\mathbb{C}$

The notion of multiplicative seminorms pretty much applies to any normed field. So one *can* think of multiplicative seminorms on an arbitrary normed $\mathbb{C}$-algebras.

Given a normed $\mathbb{C}$-algebra $A$, if $\vert\cdot\vert_x$ is a multiplicative seminorm, then its residue field $\mathcal{H}(x)$ can only be $\mathbb{C}$ (by Gelfand--Mazur), and thus the induced norm on $\mathcal{H}(x)$ is the complex modulus. 

Because of that, each multiplicative seminorm uniquely corresponds to a ring map $A\to\mathcal{H}(x)=\mathbb{C}$. This is precisely what the Gelfand spectrum collects. That is,

 > Over $\mathbb{C}$, Gelfand spectrum and Berkovich spectrum coincide.

To elaborate, below is how the correspondence works.

 * (Gelfand to Berkovich) For a ring map $x\colon A\to\mathbb{C}$, we define a multiplicative seminorm $\vert f\vert_x=\vert x(f)\vert_\mathbb{C}$.
 * (Berkovich to Gelfand) For a multiplicative seminorm $\vert\cdot\vert_x$ on $A$, as $A/\mathrm{ker}(\vert\cdot\vert_x)$ is an integral domain, it is _naturally_ isomorphic to $\mathbb{C}$.<sup><a href="#fn4" id="ref4">4</a></sup> Thus the natural ring map $x\colon A\to A/\mathrm{ker}(\vert\cdot\vert_x)\cong\mathbb{C}$ is induced.

<sup id="fn4">4. A version of Gelfand--Mazur (also called Kaplansky's theorem) claims that, for a (multiplicatively) normed _integral domain_ $B$ over $\mathbb{C}$, the map $\mathbb{C}\to B$, $c\mapsto c\cdot 1_B$, is an isomorphism. See [Cabrera Garcia and Rodriguez-Palacios 1995](https://doi.org/10.2307/2160559), as mentioned in [Bhatt and Kulkarni 2018](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0723086917300567#sec3).<a href="#ref4" title="Jump back to footnote 4 in the text.">↩</a></sup>

## 0-dimensional case

Next, we work on a case where we can explicitly compute the spectrum.

Say put $A=K\times K$. For any $x\in\widehat{A}$, there are two choices for the $\mathrm{ker}(\vert\cdot\vert_x)$:

 * $\mathrm{ker}(\vert\cdot\vert_x)=0\times K$: this corresponds to $\vert (f_1,f_2)\vert_1=\vert f_1\vert_K$.
 * $\mathrm{ker}(\vert\cdot\vert_x)=K\times 0$: this corresponds to $\vert(f_1,f_2)\vert_2=\vert f_2\vert_K$.

Thus $\widehat{A}$ consists of two points. Likewise, for $A=K^m$ ($m$-fold ring product), its spectrum $\widehat{A}$ consists of $m$ points. Thus this classifies all 0-dimensional (finitely generated) Berkovich spectrum.

## 1-dimensional case

The next complicated example will rise with $A=K[T]$. The Berkovich spectrum of $A$ gains special attention; it is called the _Berkovich line_ and denoted $\mathbb{A}^1_{\mathrm{Berk}}$ or $(\mathbb{A}^1)^{an}$.

Recall that $K$ is algebraically closed. A well-known fact from algebraic geometry classifies all prime ideals of $K[T]$ as follows.

 * Maximal ideals all have the form $(T-a)$ for some $a\in K$.
 * The only non-maximal prime ideal is $(0)$.

For the former, the corresponding norm is then described as

$$K[T]\to K\to [0,\infty), \\ f(T) \mapsto f(a) \mapsto \vert f(a)\vert_K,$$

in which I will call as __evaluation seminorms__. Such norms uniquely correspond to each $a\in K$, thus we see that the Berkovich line $$\mathbb{A}^1_{\mathrm{Berk}}$$ has a (natural) copy of $K$ inside it. (One can even show that the inclusion $$K\hookrightarrow\mathbb{A}^1_{\mathrm{Berk}}$$ is a topological embedding.)

For the latter, the residue field is then $\mathcal{H}(x)=K(T)$ (field of rational functions in $T$), and we ask what are multiplicative norms on there. It turns out that there are a lot of norms in this class, which will be introduced in later posts.

# Next

This post is continued at [part 2](/posts/2022/07/berkovich-line-2/).

#### Update Log
 * <span style="font-size:12px">220528: Created</span>
 * <span style="font-size:12px">220704: Some remarked added according to [Junekey Jeon](https://jk-jeon.github.io/)</span>
 * <span style="font-size:12px">220727: Recoined 'evaluation norm' → 'evaluation *semi*norm'</span>
